## DJANGO

### Basic Setup

1. Create a virtual environment and open it.

```
python -m venv venv
venv\Scripts\activate.bat
```

2. Get into the virtual environment.
3. Install django with `pip install django`
4. Create a django project with `django-admin startproject LCO .`
5. Start server with `python manage.py runserver`
6. Make migrations with `python manage.py makemigrations`. It prepares the migrations/changes that are needed to be made in the structure of our database table.
7. Migrate changes with `python manage.py migrate`
8. To access the admin panel, we need to create a superuser.
9. Create superuser with `python manage.py createsuperuser`
10. Open `http://127.0.0.1:8000/admin/` and login into the admin panel.

### Cross Origin Requests

1. It allows requests to be made to the server from different resources such as Postman, react and so on.
2. `pip install django-cors-headers`
3. Add it to the list of installed apps in our django project

```
INSTALLED_APPS = [
    ...,
    "corsheaders",
    ...,
]

```
4. We also need to add a middleware class to listen in on responses.

```
MIDDLEWARE = [
    ...,
    "corsheaders.middleware.CorsMiddleware",
    "django.middleware.common.CommonMiddleware",
    ...,
]
```
5. `CorsMiddleware` should be placed as high as possible, especially before any middleware that can generate responses such as Django's `CommonMiddleware` or Whitenoise's `WhiteNoiseMiddleware`. If it is not before, it will not be able to add the CORS headers to these responses.
6. Now we have to provide a list of resources from which we will be receiving requests. For now, we will allow requests from all resources
7. `CORS_ALLOW_ALL_ORIGINS = True`. Add this at the bottom in the settings.py file.
8. `ALLOWED_HOSTS = ['*']` to make sure that we can access our website from any address.
9. It is recommened to read a little about `CORS`.


### Django Rest Framework

1. `pip install djangorestframework`
2. Add it to your installed apps.
```
INSTALLED_APPS = [
    ...
    'rest_framework',
    'rest_framework.authtoken',
]
```
3. Auth Token is required for custom sign ups
4. Any global settings for a REST framework API are kept in a single configuration dictionary named REST_FRAMEWORK. Start off by adding the following to your `settings.py` module:

```

REST_FRAMEWORK = {
    # Use Django's standard `django.contrib.auth` permissions,
    # or allow read-only access for unauthenticated users.
    'DEFAULT_PERMISSION_CLASSES': [
        'rest_framework.permissions.DjangoModelPermissionsOrAnonReadOnly'
    ], 
    'DEFAULT_AUTHENTICATION_CLASSES': [
        'rest_framework.authentication.BasicAuthentication',
        'rest_framework.authentication.SessionAuthentication',
        'rest_framework.authentication.TokenAuthentication',
    ]
}
```
5. Add the following to your root urls.py file.

```

urlpatterns = [
    ...
    path('api-auth/', include('rest_framework.urls'))
]
```

6. Run server to make sure there are no bugs.
7. Make migrations if there are any.





