# Introduction to Algorithms

## Binary Search

Now suppose you log on to Facebook. When you do, Facebook has to verify that you have an account on the site. So, it needs to search for your username in its database. Suppose your username is karlmageddon. Facebook could start from the As and search for your name—but it makes more sense for it to begin somewhere in the middle.
   
This is a search problem. And all these cases use the same algorithm to solve the problem: `binary search`.
    
Binary search is an algorithm; its input is a sorted list of elements. If an element you’re looking for is in that list, binary search returns the position where it’s located. Otherwise, binary search returns null.

Here’s an example of how binary search works. I’m thinking of a number between 1 and 100. You have to try to guess my number in the fewest tries possible. With every guess, I’ll tell you if your guess is too low, too high, or correct.
    
Suppose you start guessing like this: 1, 2, 3, 4 …. This is simple search. With each guess, you’re eliminating only one number. If my number was 99, it could take you 99 guesses to get there!
    
Here’s a better technique. Start with 50. Too low, but you just eliminated half the numbers! Now you know that 1–50 are all too low. Next guess: 75. Too high, but again you cut down half the remaining numbers! With binary search, you guess the middle number and eliminate half the remaining numbers every time. Next is 63 (halfway between 50 and 75). This is binary search.

Suppose you’re looking for a word in the dictionary. The dictionary has 240,000 words. In the worst case, how many steps do you think each search will take? Simple search could take 240,000 steps if the word you’re looking for is the very last one in the book. With each step of binary search, you cut the number of words in half until you’re let with only one word. So binary search will take 18 steps—a big diference! 
    
In general, for any list of n, binary search will take  steps to run in the worst case, whereas simple search will take n steps.
    
    
