# Big O Notation

## Algorithm Running Time

Big O notation is special notation that tells you how fast an algorithm is. 

Algorithm running times grow at diferent rates. As the number of items increases, binary search takes a little 
more time to run. But simple search takes a lot more time to run. So as the list of numbers gets bigger, binary search suddenly becomes a lot faster than simple search.

It’s not enough to know how long an algorithm takes to run—you need to know how the running time increases as the list size increases. hat’s where Big O  notation comes in.

Big O notation tells you how fast an algorithm is. For example, suppose you have a list of size n. Simple search needs to check each element, so  it will take n operations. he run time in Big O notation is O(n). Where are the seconds? here are none—Big O doesn’t tell you the speed in seconds. Big O notation lets you compare the number of operations. It tells you how fast the algorithm grows.

> Big O establishes a worst-case run time.

Suppose you’re using simple search to look for a person in the phone book. You know that simple search takes O(n) time to run, which 
means in the worst case, you’ll have to look through every single entry in your phone book. 

Along with the worst-case run time, it’s also important to look at the average-case run time.

**Some common Big O run times**

Here are five `Big O` run times that you’ll encounter a lot, sorted from fastest to slowest:

- O(log n), also known as log time. Example: Binary search.
- O(n), also known as linear time. Example: Simple search.
- O(n * log n). Example: A fast sorting algorithm, like quicksort .
- O(n ** 2) Example: A slow sorting algorithm, like selection sort.
- O(n!). Example: A really slow algorithm, like the traveling salesperson.

**Main Takeaways**

- Algorithm speed isn’t measured in seconds, but in growth of the number of operations.
- Instead, we talk about how quickly the run time of an algorithm increases as the size of the input increases.
- Run time of algorithms is expressed in Big O notation.
- O(log n) is faster than O(n), but it gets a lot faster as the list of items you’re searching grows.


## The Travelling Salesperson

You might have read that last section and thought, “here’s no way I’ll ever run into an algorithm that takes O(n!) time.” Well, let me try to prove you wrong! Here’s an example of an algorithm with a really bad running time. his is a famous problem in computer science, because its growth is appalling and some very smart people think it can’t be improved. It’s called the traveling salesperson problem.

You have a salesperson. The salesperson has to go to five cities. This salesperson, whom I’ll call Opus, wants to hit all five cities while traveling the minimum distance. Here’s one way to do that: look at every possible order in which he could travel to the cities.He adds up the total distance and then picks the path with the lowest distance. here are 120 permutations with 5 cities, so it will take 120 operations to solve the problem for 5 cities. For 6 cities, it will take 720 operations (there are 720 permutations). For 7 cities, it will take 5,040 operations!

In general, for n items, it will take n! (n factorial) operations to compute the result. So this is O(n!) time, or factorial time. It takes a lot of operations for everything except the smallest numbers. Once you’re dealing with 100+ cities, it’s impossible to calculate the answer in time—the Sun will collapse first.

This is a terrible algorithm! Opus should use a diferent one, right? But he can’t. his is one of the unsolved problems in computer science. here’s no fast known algorithm for it, and smart people think it’s impossible to have a smart algorithm for this problem. The best we can do is come up with an approximate solution.

## Recap

- Binary search is a lot faster than simple search.
- O(log n) is faster than O(n), but it gets a lot faster once the list of items you’re searching through grows.
- Algorithm speed isn’t measured in seconds.
- Algorithm times are measured in terms of growth of an algorithm.
- Algorithm times are written in Big O notation.
