## WEB APIs

#### World Wide Web
The Internet is a system of interconnected computer networks.
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), was the first standard, universal way to share documents over the internet

#### URLs
A URL (Uniform Resource Locator) is the address of a resource on the internet. For example, the Google homepage lives at https://www.google.com.

When you want to go to the Google homepage, you type the full URL address into a web browser. Your browser then sends a request out over the internet and is magically connected to a server that responds with the data needed to render the
Google homepage in your browser.

This request and response pattern is the basis of all web communication. A client (typically a web browser but also a native app or really any internet-connected device) requests information and a server responds with a response.

Since web communication occurs via HTTP these are known more formally as HTTP requests and HTTP responses.

Within a given URL are also several discrete components. For example, consider the Google homepage located at https://www.google.com. The first part, `https`, refers to the scheme used. It tells the web browser how to access resources at the location. For a website this is typically `http` or `https`, but it could also be `ftp` for files, `smtp` for email, and so on. The next section, www.google.com, is the hostname or the actual name of the site. Every URL contains a scheme and a host.

Many webpages also contain an optional path, too. If you go to the homepage for Python at https://www.python.org and click on the link for the “About” page you’ll be redirected to https://www.python.org/about/. The `/about/` piece is the path.

In summary, every URL like https://python.org/about/ has three potential parts:
- a scheme - https
- a hostname - www.python.org
- and an (optional) path - /about/

#### Internet Protocol Suite

Once we know the actual URL of a resource, a whole collection of other technologies must work properly (together) to connect the client with the server and load an actual webpage. This is broadly referred to as the **internet protocol suite**.

Several things happen when a user types https://www.google.com into their web browser and hits Enter:

- First the browser needs to find the desired server, somewhere, on the vast internet. It uses a domain name service (DNS) to translate the domain name “google.com” into an IP address, which is a unique sequence of numbers representing every connected device on the internet. Domain names are used because it is easier for humans to remember a domain name like “google.com” than an IP address like “172.217.164.68”.

- After the browser has the IP address for a given domain, it needs a way to set up a consistent connection with the desired server. This happens via the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) which provides reliable, ordered, and error-checked delivery of bytes between two application.

To establish a TCP connection between two computers, a three-way “handshake” occurs between the client and server:
- The client sends a SYN asking to establish a connection.
- The server responds with a SYN-ACK acknowledging the request and passing a connection parameter.
- The client sends an ACK back to the server confirming the connection.

Once the TCP connection is established, the two computers can start communicating via HTTP.

#### HTTP Verbs
Every webpage contains both an address (the URL) as well as a list of approved actions known as HTTP verbs. So far we’ve mainly talked about getting a web page, but it’s also possible to create, edit, and delete content.

Consider the Facebook website. After logging in, you can read your timeline, create a new post, or edit/delete an existing one. These four actions Create-Read-Update-Delete are known colloquially as CRUD functionality and represent the overwhelming majority of actions taken online.

The HTTP protocol contains a number of request methods16 that can be used while requesting information from a server. The four most common map to CRUD functionality. They are POST, GET, PUT, and DELETE.

To create content you use `POST`, to read content `GET`, to update it `PUT`, and to delete it you use `DELETE`.

#### Endpoints
A website consists of web pages with HTML, CSS, images, JavaScript, and more. But a web API has endpoints instead which are URLs with a list of available actions (HTTP verbs) that expose data (typically in JSON, which is the most common data format these days and the default for Django REST Framework).

For example, we could create the following API endpoints for a new website called mysite:

- https://www.mysite.com/api/users        # GET returns all the users
- https://www.mysite.com/api/users/<id>   # GET returns a single user

In the first endpoint, `/api/users`, an available GET request returns a list of all available users. This type of endpoint which returns multiple data resources is known as a collection.
The second endpoint `/api/users/<id>` represents a single user. A GET request returns information about just that one user.
    
If we added `POST` to the first endpoint we could create a new user, while adding `DELETE` to the second endpoint would allow us to delete a single user.
    
**A webpage consists of HTML, CSS, images, and more. But an endpoint is just a way to access data via the available HTTP verbs.**
    
#### HTTP
HTTP is a request-response protocol between two computers that have an existing TCP connection. The computer making the requests is known as the client while the computer responding is known as the server. Typically a client is a web browser but it could also be an iOS app or really any internet-connected device. A server is a fancy name for any computer optimized to work over the internet. All we really need to transform a basic laptop into a server is some special software and a persistent internet connection.
Every HTTP message consists of a status line, headers, and optional body data. For example, here is a sample HTTP message that a browser might send to request the Google homepage located at https://www.google.com.

```
> GET / HTTP/1.1
> Host: google.com
> Accept_Language: en-US
```
 
The top line is known as the request line and it specifies the HTTP method to use (GET), the path (/), and the specific version of HTTP to use (HTTP/1.1).
   
The two subsequent lines are HTTP headers: Host is the domain name and Accept_Language is the language to use, in this case American English. There are many HTTP headers available.

HTTP messages also have an optional third section, known as the body. However we only see a body message with HTTP responses containing data.
    
For simplicity, let’s assume that the Google homepage only contained the HTML “Hello, World!” This is what the HTTP response message from a Google server might look like:
    
```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Date: Mon, 03 Aug 2020 23:26:07 GMT
Server: gws
Accept-Ranges: bytes
Content-Length: 13
Content-Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8
Hello, world!
```
The top line is the response line and it specifies that we are using `HTTP/1.1`. The status code `200 OK` indicates the request by the client was successful.
    
The next eight lines are HTTP headers. And finally after a line break there is our actual body content of “Hello, world!”.

Every HTTP message, whether a request or response, therefore has the following format:
    
```
Response/request line
Headers...
(optional) Body
```
Most web pages contain multiple resources that require multiple HTTP request/response cycles. If a webpage had HTML, one CSS file, and an image, three separate trips back-and-forth between the client and server would be required before the complete web page could be rendered in the browser.


#### Status Codes
    
Once your web browser has executed an HTTP Request on a URL there is no guarantee things will actually work! Thus there is a quite lengthy list of HTTP Status Codes available to accompany each HTTP response.
    
You can tell the general type of status code based on the following system:
- 2xx Success - the action requested by the client was received, understood, and accepted
- 3xx Redirection - the requested URL has moved
- 4xx Client Error - there was an error, typically a bad URL request by the client
- 4xx Client Error - there was an error, typically a bad URL request by the client

There is no need to memorize all the available status codes. With practice you will become familiar with the most common ones such as `200 (OK)`, `201 (Created)`, `301 (Moved Permanently)`, `404 (Not Found)`, and `500 (Server Error)`.

The important thing to remember is that, generally speaking, there are only four potential outcomes to any given HTTP request: it worked (2xx), it was redirected somehow (3xx), the client made an error (4xx), or the server made an error (5xx).

These status codes are automatically placed in the request/response line at the top of every HTTP message.

    
#### Statelessness

**A final important point to make about HTTP is that it is a stateless protocol**. This means each request/response pair is completely independent of the previous one. There is no stored memory of past interactions, which is known as state in computer science.
    
Statelessness brings a lot of benefits to HTTP. Since all electronic communication systems have signal loss over time, if we did not have a stateless protocol, things would constantly break if one request/response cycle didn’t go through. As a result HTTP is known as a very resilient distributed protocol.
    
The downside however is that managing state is really, really important in web applications. State is how a website remembers that you’ve logged in and how an e-commerce site manages your shopping cart. It’s fundamental to how we use modern websites, yet it’s not supported on HTTP itself.
    
Historically state was maintained on the server but it has moved more and more to the client, the web browser, in modern front-end frameworks like React, Angular, and Vue.
    
>  HTTP is stateless. This makes it very good for reliably sending information between two computers, but bad at remembering
anything outside of each individual request/response pair.
    
#### REST

REST is an architecture first proposed in 2000 by Roy Fielding in his dissertation thesis. It is an approach to building APIs on top of the web, which means on top of the HTTP protocol.

**What makes an API actually RESTful?**
    
Every RESTful API:
- is stateless, like HTTP
- supports common HTTP verbs (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, etc.)
- returns data in either the JSON or XML format
    
Any RESTful API must, at a minimum, have these three principles. The standard is important because it provides a consistent way to both design and consume web APIs. 
    
**Ultimately a web API is a collection of endpoints that expose certain parts of an underlying database.As developers we control the URLs for each endpoint, what underlying data is available, and what actions are possible via HTTP verbs. By using HTTP headers we can set various levels of authentication and permission too.**

<link rel="stylesheet"
      href="//cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/highlight.js/11.0.1/styles/default.min.css">
<script src="//cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/highlight.js/11.0.1/highlight.min.js"></script>   
<script>hljs.highlightAll();</script>   
    
    
    
