## Chapter 2: Library Website and API

Django REST Framework works alongside the Django web framework to create web APIs. We cannot build a web API with only Django Rest Framework; it always must be added to a project after Django itself has been installed and configured.

Django creates websites containing webpages, while Django REST Framework creates web APIs which are a collection of URL endpoints containing available HTTP verbs that return JSON.

To illustrate these concepts, we will build out a basic Library website with traditional Django and then extend it into a web API with Django REST Framework.

### Traditional Django

#### Setting up django project

```python
#virtual environment
python -m venv venv
venv\scripts\activate.bat

#install django
pip install django

#create django project in the same directory
django-admin startproject config . 

#Run migrate to sync the database with Django’s default settings and start up the local Django web server.
python manage.py migrate
python manage.py runserver
```


**First App**

```python
python manage.py startapp books
```

Register the app

```python
# config/settings.py
INSTALLED_APPS = [
'django.contrib.admin',
'django.contrib.auth',
'django.contrib.contenttypes',
'django.contrib.sessions',
'django.contrib.messages',
'django.contrib.staticfiles',
# Local
'books', # new
]
```

**Models**
```python
# books/models.py
from django.db import models
    class Book(models.Model):
        title = models.CharField(max_length=250)
        subtitle = models.CharField(max_length=250)
        author = models.CharField(max_length=100)
        isbn = models.CharField(max_length=13)
        def __str__(self):
            return self.title
```

Make Migrations and update the database
```python
python manage.py makemigrations books   #it is recommended to mention the name of the app
python manage.py migrate
```

Create superuser with `python manage.py createsuperuser`

Register the model in the `books/admin.py`
```python
# books/admin.py
from django.contrib import admin
from .models import Book
admin.site.register(Book)
```

Start the server. Open the admin panel and login with the superuser. Add some books!

Our project has data now but we need a way to expose it as a web page. That means creating views, URLs, and template files.

**VIEWS**

The `views.py` file controls how the database model content is displayed. Since we want to list all books we can use the built-in generic class ListView.

```python
# books/views.py
from django.views.generic import ListView
from .models import Book
class BookListView(ListView):
	model = Book
	template_name = 'book_list.html'
```

**URLs**

We need to set up both the project-level `urls.py` file and then one within the books app. When a user visits our site they will first interact with the `config/urls.py` file so let’s configure that first. Add the `include` import on the second line and then a new path for our books app.

```python
# config/urls.py
from django.contrib import admin
from django.urls import path, include # new
urlpatterns = [
    path('admin/', admin.site.urls),
    path('', include('books.urls')), # new
    ]
```

The top two lines import the built-in admin app, path for our routes, and include which will be used with our books app. If a user goes to `/admin/` they will be redirected to the admin app. We use the empty string, `''`, for the books app route which means a user on the homepage will be redirected directly to the books app.

Create a `books/urls.py` and configure it.

```python
# books/urls.py
from django.urls import path
from .views import BookListView
urlpatterns = [
    path('', BookListView.as_view(), name='home'),
]
```

The way Django works, now when a user goes to the homepage of our website they will first hit the `config/urls.py` file, then be redirected to `books/urls.py` which specifies using the `BookListView`. In this view file, the Book model is used along with `ListView` to list out all books.

The final step is to create our template file that controls the layout on the actual web page. We have already specified its name as `book_list.html` in our view. There are two options for its location: by default the Django template loader will look for templates within our books app in the following location: `books/templates/books/book_list.html`. We could also create a separate,
project-level templates directory instead and update our `config/settings.py` file to point there.

Start by making a new `templates` folder within the `books` app, then within it a `books` folder, and finally a `book_list.html` file.

Now update the template the file.

```HTML
<!-- books/templates/books/book_list.html -->
<h1>All books</h1>
{% for book in object_list %}
<ul>
<li>Title: {{ book.title }}</li>
<li>Subtitle: {{ book.subtitle }}</li>
<li>Author: {{ book.author }}</li>
<li>ISBN: {{ book.isbn }}</li>
</ul>
{% endfor %}
```

Django ships with a template language that allows for basic logic. Here we use the `for` tag to loop over all available books. Template tags must be included within opening/closing brackets and parentheses. So the format is always `{% for ... %}` and then we must close our loop later with `{% endfor %}`.

What we are looping over is the object containing all available books in our model courtesy of `ListView`. The name of this object is `object_list`. Therefore to loop over each book we write `{% for book in object_list %}`. And then display each field from our model.



### Django Rest Framework

#### Setting up

`pip install djangorestframework`

Add rest_framework to the INSTALLED_APPS config in our `config/settings.py` file.

```python
# config/settings.py
INSTALLED_APPS = [
    'django.contrib.admin',
    'django.contrib.auth',
    'django.contrib.contenttypes',
    'django.contrib.sessions',
    'django.contrib.messages',
    'django.contrib.staticfiles',
    # 3rd party
    'rest_framework', # new
    # Local
    'books',
]
```
Ultimately, our API will expose a single endpoint that lists out all books in JSON. So we will need
a new URL route, a new view, and a new serializer file

There are multiple ways we can organize these files however my preferred approach is to create a dedicated api app.

Let’s first create a new api app.

`python manage.py startapp api`

Then add it to INSTALLED_APPS.

```python
# config/settings.py
INSTALLED_APPS = [
    # Local
    'books.apps.BooksConfig',
    'api.apps.ApiConfig', # new
    # 3rd party
    'rest_framework',
    'django.contrib.admin',
    'django.contrib.auth',
    'django.contrib.contenttypes',
    'django.contrib.sessions',
    'django.contrib.messages',
    'django.contrib.staticfiles',
    ]
```
The api app will not have its own database models so there is no need to create a migration file and run migrate to update the database.

#### URLs

Let’s start with our URL configs. Adding an API endpoint is just like configuring a traditional Django app’s routes. First at the project-level we need to include the api app and configure its URL route, which will be `api/`.

```python
# config/urls.py
from django.contrib import admin
from django.urls import path, include
urlpatterns = [
    path('admin/', admin.site.urls),
    path('api/', include('api.urls')), # new
    path('', include('books.urls')),
]
```

Then create a urls.py file within the api app. And update it as follows:

```python
# api/urls.py
from django.urls import path
from .views import BookAPIView
urlpatterns = [
    path('', BookAPIView.as_view()),
]
```

#### Views

Next up is our views.py file which relies on Django REST Framework’s built-in generic class views.

```python
# api/views.py
from rest_framework import generics
from books.models import Book
from .serializers import BookSerializer

class BookAPIView(generics.ListAPIView):
    queryset = Book.objects.all()
    serializer_class = BookSerializer

```
On the top lines we import Django REST Framework’s generics class of views, the models from our books app, and serializers from our api app (we will make the serializers next).

Then we create a `BookAPIView` that uses `ListAPIView` to create a read-only endpoint for all book instances.

The only two steps required in our view are to specify the queryset which is all available books, and then the serializer_class which will be `BookSerializer`.
