# Permissions

Django REST Framework ships with several out-of-the-box permissions settings that we can use to secure our API. These can be applied at a project-level, a view-level, or at any individual model level.

**Create a new user from the admin panel**

Add login to the browsable API

Within the project-level `urls.py` file, add a new URL route that includes `rest_framework.urls`. Somewhat confusingly, the actual route specified can be anything we want; what matters is that `rest_framework.urls` is included somewhere. We will use the route `api-auth` since that matches official documentation, but we could just as easily use anything-we-want and everything would
work just the same.

```python
# config/urls.py
from django.contrib import admin
from django.urls import include, path
urlpatterns = [
    path('admin/', admin.site.urls),
    path('api/v1/', include('posts.urls')),
    **path('api-auth/', include('rest_framework.urls')), # new**
]
```

Now navigate to our browsable API at http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/. There is a subtle change: next to the username in the upper right corner is a little downward-facing arrow.

## AllowAny

Logout all the users and be anonymous. Currently, any anonymous non-authorized user can access our PostList endpoint. We know this because even though we are not logged-in, we can see our single blog post. Even worse, anyone has full access to create, edit, update, or delete a post!

## View-Level Permission

What we want now is to restrict API access to authenticated users. There are multiple places we
could do this—`project-level`, `view-level`, or `object-level`—but since we only have two views at the
moment let’s start there and add permissions to each of them.

In your `posts/views.py` file, import permissions at the top from Django REST Framework and
then add a `permission_classes` field to each view.

```python 
# posts/views.py
from rest_framework import generics, permissions # new
from .models import Post
from .serializers import PostSerializer

class PostList(generics.ListCreateAPIView):
    **permission_classes = (permissions.IsAuthenticated,)** # new
    queryset = Post.objects.all()
    serializer_class = PostSerializer
    
class PostDetail(generics.RetrieveUpdateDestroyAPIView):
    **permission_classes = (permissions.IsAuthenticated,)** # new
    queryset = Post.objects.all()
    serializer_class = PostSerializer

```

We no longer see our Post List page. Instead we are greeted with an unfriendly HTTP 403 Forbidden status code since we are not logged in. And there are no forms in the browsable API to edit the data since we don’t have permission.

Therefore at this point only logged-in users can view our API. If you log back in with either your
superuser or testuser account the API endpoints will be accessible.

But think about what happens as the API grows in complexity. It’s likely we will have many more views and endpoints in the future. Adding a dedicated permission_classes to each view seems repetitive if we want to set the same permissions setting across our entire API.

Wouldn’t it be better to change our permissions once, ideally at the project-level, rather than doing it for each and every view?

## Project-Level Permissions

Django REST Framework ships with a number of built-in project-level permissions settings we can use, including:

- `AllowAny` - any user, authenticated or not, has full access
- `IsAuthenticated` - only authenticated, registered users have access
- `IsAdminUser` - only admins/superusers have access
- `IsAuthenticatedOrReadOnly` - unauthorized users can view any page, but only authenticated users have write, edit, or delete privileges

Implementing any of these four settings requires updating the `DEFAULT_PERMISSION_CLASSES` setting and refreshing our web browser.

Let’s switch to `IsAuthenticated` so only authenticated, or logged in, users can view the API.

Update the `config/settings.py` file as follows:

```python
# config/settings.py
REST_FRAMEWORK = {
    'DEFAULT_PERMISSION_CLASSES': [
        **'rest_framework.permissions.IsAuthenticated',** # new
]
}
```

Now go back into the `posts/views.py` file and delete the permissions changes we just made.

```python
# posts/views.py
from rest_framework import generics
from .models import Post
from .serializers import PostSerializer
class PostList(generics.ListCreateAPIView):
    queryset = Post.objects.all()
    serializer_class = PostSerializer
class PostDetail(generics.RetrieveUpdateDestroyAPIView):
    queryset = Post.objects.all()
    serializer_class = PostSerializer
```

If you refresh the Post List and Detail List API pages you will still see the same 403 status code. We have now required all users to authenticate before they can access the API, but we can always make additional view-level changes as needed, too.

## Custom permissions

We want only the author of a specific blog post to be able to edit or delete it; otherwise the blog post should be read-only. So the superuser account should have full CRUD access to the individual blog instance, but the regular user testuser should not.

Create a new `permissions.py` file in our posts app.

Internally, Django REST Framework relies on a BasePermission class from which all other permission classes inherit. That means the built-in permissions settings like AllowAny, IsAuthenticated, and others extend it.

Here is the actual source code which is available on Github.

```python
class BasePermission(object):
    """
    A base class from which all permission classes should inherit.
    """
    def has_permission(self, request, view):
        """
        Return `True` if permission is granted, `False` otherwise.
        """
        return True
    def has_object_permission(self, request, view, obj):
        """
        Return `True` if permission is granted, `False` otherwise.
        """
        return True


```
To create our own custom permission, we will override the `has_object_permission` method. Specifically we want to allow read-only for all requests but for any write requests, such as edit or delete, the author must be the same as the current logged-in user.

Here is what `our posts/permissions.py` file looks like.

```python
# posts/permissions.py
from rest_framework import permissions
class IsAuthorOrReadOnly(permissions.BasePermission):
    def has_object_permission(self, request, view, obj):
        # Read-only permissions are allowed for any request
        if request.method in permissions.SAFE_METHODS:
            return True
        # Write permissions are only allowed to the author of a post
        return obj.author == request.user
```

We import permissions at the top and then create a custom class `IsAuthorOrReadOnly` which extends `BasePermission`. Then we override `has_object_permission`. If a request contains HTTP verbs included in `SAFE_METHODS` – a tuple containing GET, OPTIONS, and HEAD – then it is a read-only request and permission is granted.

Otherwise the request is for a write of some kind, which means updating the API resource so either create, delete, or edit functionality. In that case, we check if the author of the object in question, which is our blog post obj.author matches the user making the request request.user.

Back in the views.py file we should import IsAuthorOrReadOnly and then we can add `permission_classes` for PostDetail.

```python
# posts/views.py
from rest_framework import generics
from .models import Post
from .permissions import IsAuthorOrReadOnly # new
from .serializers import PostSerializer
class PostList(generics.ListCreateAPIView):
    queryset = Post.objects.all()
    serializer_class = PostSerializer
class PostDetail(generics.RetrieveUpdateDestroyAPIView):
    permission_classes = (IsAuthorOrReadOnly,) # new
    queryset = Post.objects.all()
    serializer_class = PostSerializer


Note that the generic views will only check the object-level permissions for views that retrieve a single model instance. If you require object-level filtering of list views–for a collection of instances–you’ll need to filter by overriding the initial queryset.

As a general strategy, it is a good idea to set a strict project-level permissions policy such that only authenticated users can view the API. Then make view-level or custom permissions more accessible as needed on specific API endpoints.
