### What is Inheritance ?
Inheritance allows us to define a class that inherits all the methods and properties from another class.

### How to create a parent class?
Any class can be a parent class, so the syntax is the same as creating any other class.

```python
class Person:
  def __init__(self, fname, lname):
    self.firstname = fname
    self.lastname = lname

  def printname(self):
    print(self.firstname, self.lastname)

#Use the Person class to create an object, and then execute the printname method:

x = Person("John", "Doe")
x.printname()

```

### How to create a child class?

To create a class that  inherits the functionality from another class, send the parent class as a parameter when creating the child class.

```python
class Student(Person):
  pass

# Now the Student class has the same properties as the Person class
```

```python
x = Student("Mike", "Olsen")
x.printname()

```

### When is the `__init__` function called?
> The `__init__()` function is called automatically every time the class is being used to create a new object.

### What happens when you add `__init__()` to the child class?

When you add the `__init__()` function, the child class will no longer inherit the parent's `__init__()`

The child's `__init__()` function overrides the inheritance of the parent's `__init__()` function.

```python

class Student(Person):
  def __init__(self, fname, lname):
    #add properties etc.
```

### How to keep the inheritance of the parent's `__init__()` function?

To keep the inheritance of the parent's __init__() function, add a call to the parent's __init__() function.

class Student(Person):
  def __init__(self, fname, lname):
    Person.__init__(self, fname, lname)

### What is the `super()` function?

The `super()` function will make the child class inherit all the methods and properties from its parent.

```python
class Student(Person):
  def __init__(self, fname, lname):
    super().__init__(fname, lname)

```

By using the `super()` function, you do not have to use the name of the parent element, it will automatically inherit the methods and properties from its parent.

### How to override the methods of the parent class?

If you add a method in the child class with the same name as a function in the parent class, the inheritance of the parent method will be overridden.
